FC Barcelona 2–8 FC Bayern Munich

The 2019–20 UEFA Champions League quarter-final match between Barcelona and Bayern Munich was played on 14 August 2020 at the Estadio da Luz in Lisbon, Portugal. Bayern won the match 8–2 on their eventual conquest of the tournament, making it Barcelona's heaviest defeat since 1951, when they lost 6–0 to Espanyol at the 1950–51 La Liga. It was also the first time they had conceded eight goals in a game since 1946, when they lost 8–0 to Sevilla in the 1946 Copa del Generalisimo.

Background
In the 1998–99 UEFA Champions League group stage, Bayern defeated Barca in both matches, en route to Bayern topping Group D while Barcelona finished third and failed to reach the knockout stage. Manchester United was also in the same group stage, drawing all their matches against Bayern and Barca to place second which was sufficient for them to advance. Bayern went on to reach the final hosted by Camp Nou in which they lost to Manchester United, allowing United to accomplish the continental treble.

Bayern and Barca had met in four knockout ties since 2008–09 UEFA Champions League, which yielded 26 goals prior to this game. It is interesting that each time the eventual winner of the Bayern-Barca knockout tie would go on not only to win the UEFA Champions League, but also complete the continental treble, which occurred in 2009, 2013, 2015, and 2020. Bayern's Thomas Muller was a reserve in 2009, but started all subsequent Bayern-Barca matches.

Barcelona won 5–1 on aggregate in the 2008–09 UEFA Champions League quarter-finals. Barca's 4–0 win at Camp Nou in the first leg, with all goals scored in the first half, led Bayern Munich president Franz Beckenbauer to remark "What I saw in the first half is, without doubt, the worst football in Bayern's history". Barca manager Pep Guardiola was sent off in the first leg for protesting a yellow card given to Lionel Messi, and had to watch the second leg from the stands. This defeat as well as an earlier 5–1 loss in a Bundesliga match eventually led to the sacking of Bayern manager Jurgen Klinsmann.

The semi-finals of the 2012–13 competition saw Arjen Robben and Thomas Muller inspire Bayern to a 7–0 aggregate victory, to become the biggest win of the semi-finals on aggregate, including a 3–0 win at the Camp Nou which, to date, was Barcelona's last home defeat in European competition.

The semi-finals of the 2014–15 competition saw Lionel Messi and Neymar as the key players in a 5–3 aggregate win over Bayern, a 3–0 win in Camp Nou and then a 3–2 defeat at the Allianz Arena. Bayern's manager at the time was Pep Guardiola, who had previously managed Barca from 2008 to 2012, including the 2008–09 Champions League quarter-final against Bayern.

Road to the quarter-final meeting
Both teams qualified for the knockout phase as winners of their respective groups. Barcelona had faced Borussia Dortmund, Inter Milan and Slavia Prague, while Bayern, who faced Tottenham Hotspur, Olympiacos and Red Star Belgrade won all six of their group matches, including an emphatic 7–2 win at the Tottenham Hotspur Stadium, scoring 24 goals and conceding just five. Barcelona faced Napoli in the round of 16 and won 4–2 on aggregate, while Bayern Munich beat Chelsea 7–1 on aggregate, with the second leg matches of both teams played behind closed doors due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.

Match
The match was played on 14 August 2020 at the Estádio da Luz in Lisbon, Portugal, as part of a single-elimination tournament, following UEFA's decision to complete the 2019–20 UEFA Champions League and 2019–20 UEFA Europa League seasons, which had been halted since March due to the COVID-19 pandemic, at neutral venues. In the opening 10 minutes, Thomas Muller fired Bayern Munich ahead following a one-two with Robert Lewandowski. Shortly after, David Alaba sliced a cross from Jordi Alba into his own net shortly after to level the scores, before Barcelona themselves missed two opportunities. Luis Suarez was denied by Manuel Neuer and Lionel Messi hit the post with a curling cross-shot. The following minutes took the game away from Barcelona, as Ivan Perisic smashed in a deflected shot in the 21st minute for Bayern, fed by a pass from Serge Gnabry, after a passing error from Sergi Roberto. Gnabry himself scored with a shot from a through-ball from Leon Goretzka in the 27th minute, and Muller quickly added the fourth four minutes later from a cross by Joshua Kimmich.

In the 57th minute, a neat turn and finish from the centre of the box to the bottom-right corner by Suárez gave the Spanish side a glimmer of hope, but that proved premature, as Kimmich's side-footed finish in the 63rd minute, connecting with a delivery from Alphonso Davies – who had beaten his marker, Nelson Semedo, at the edge of the box – made the scoreline 5–2 to the Germans. Bayern scored three goals in the closing 10 minutes of the match as in-form striker Lewandowski, who had been quiet for most of the game, headed his 14th goal of the campaign from a close-range cross by Philippe Coutinho in the 82nd minute. Coutinho, who was on loan to Bayern from Barcelona, scored the last two goals of the game, a right-footed shot from the centre of the box to the bottom-left corner from a pass by Muller in the 85th minute, followed by a left-footed shot from very close range to the bottom-left corner from a headed pass by substitute Lucas Hernandez in the 89th minute.

Post-match
Barcelona suffered their heaviest loss in 69 years, this was the first time they had conceded more than five goals in a UEFA Champions League game, and their worst concession since the 8–0 defeat to Sevilla in 1946. Bayern Munich, on the other hand, continued their run of winning all UEFA Champions League matches they played in the season and eventually won the tournament. The eight goals Bayern Munich scored is the most a side has scored in a European Cup knockout match since Real Madrid defeated FC Swarovski Tirol 9–1 in a last 16 tie in 1991.

Bayern striker Robert Lewandowski became the first player to score in eight or more consecutive UEFA Champions League matches since Cristiano Ronaldo in April 2018 (11 games), while Bayern's coach Hans-Dieter Flick became only the third manager in Champions League history to win his first six matches in charge, after Fabio Capello in 1992–93 and Luis Fernandez in 1994–95. The match was also compared to the 2014 FIFA World Cup semi-final match between Brazil and Germany as Thomas Müller opened the scoring in the 7–1 routing of Brazil, which Jérome Boateng and Manuel Neuer also played in. Flick was also the assistant coach of Germany in the same match.

Barcelona defender Gerard Pique stated that the club needed structural changes on all levels, while club president Josep Maria Bartomeu described it as a "disaster". Three days after the game, Barcelona sacked manager Quique Setién. He was followed the next day by the club's director of football, Eric Abidal. Setien was replaced on 19 August by Ronald Koeman, who had played for the club from 1989 to 1995 and was their assistant manager under Louis van Gaal from 1998 to 2000. Partly owing to this heavy defeat, Barcelona captain Lionel Messi officially expressed his desire to leave the club, in which he explained his decision by failing to compete for the Champions League title after two previous capitulations in the competition (0–3 against Roma in 2017–18 quarter-finals, and 0–4 against Liverpool in 2018–19 semi-finals), by saying: "I looked further afield and I want to compete at the highest level, win titles, compete in the Champions League. You can win or lose in it, because it is very difficult, but you have to compete. At least compete for it and let us not fall apart in Rome, Liverpool, Lisbon. All that led me to think about that decision that I wanted to carry out."

Bayern Munich managed to win their sixth title in the competition and their second continental treble, following a 1–0 win over Paris Saint-Germain in the final.