Naruto Uzumaki (Uzumaki Naruto) is a shinobi of Konohagakure's Uzumaki clan. He became the jinchūriki of the Nine-Tails on the day of his birth — a fate that caused him to be shunned by most of Konoha throughout his childhood. After joining Team Kakashi, Naruto worked hard to gain the village's acknowledgement all the while chasing his dream to become Hokage. In the following years, through many hardships and ordeals, he became a capable ninja regarded as a hero both by the villagers, and soon after, the rest of the world, becoming known as the Hero of the Hidden Leaf. He soon proved to be one of the main factors in winning the Fourth Shinobi World War, leading him to achieve his dream and become the village's Seventh Hokage. 

Background 

Naruto was born on the night of October 10th to Minato Namikaze (the Fourth Hokage) and Kushina Uzumaki (the second jinchūriki of the Nine-Tails). He was named after Naruto Musasabi, the protagonist of Jiraiya's first book, which made the Sannin his godfather.[14] The Third Hokage made special arrangements for Minato to preserve Kushina's seal containing the Nine-Tails while she gave birth to Naruto in a remote location, escorted by midwives and Anbu. A masked man, Tobi, tracked down their location, however, killed the midwives and Anbu, and captured Naruto, forcing Minato to quickly rescue him and teleport him to a safe house.

With Minato gone, Tobi captured Kushina and released the Nine-Tails from her, using it to devastate Konoha.[15] Minato saved Kushina and left Naruto in her care before he went to protect the village,[16] eventually defeating Tobi and freeing the Nine-Tails from Tobi's control. Returning to Naruto and Kushina's location, Minato realised the only way to stop the Nine-Tails was to seal it within Naruto, believing that his son would someday need the fox's power to defeat Tobi when he returned.[17] Since the Nine-Tails' chakra was too immense to be sealed into an infant, Minato sacrificed his soul to split the fox's chakra in half, sealing the Yin half within himself and the Yang half within Naruto. After telling Naruto how much they loved him, Minato and Kushina succumbed to their wounds from protecting their son from the Nine-Tails and passed away.

Orphaned, not having parents or anyone else to provide for him, Naruto received monthly income from the village in order to afford daily necessities. Naruto grew up not knowing who his parents were, receiving only his mother's surname, as Hiruzen wanted to protect Naruto from his father's enemies.[18] Minato's dying wish that Naruto be regarded as a hero was honoured by the very few who could put aside their pain and losses caused by the disaster, while the majority of Konoha, however having no knowledge of the circumstances surrounding his birth, openly ostracised and resented Naruto for containing the beast that devastated the village and took many lives; some even viewed Naruto as the Nine-Tails itself. Soon, the Third Hokage forbade anyone from mentioning the Nine-Tails, hoping that the younger generation would not blindly hate Naruto as their parents did.[19] However, Naruto's peers emulated their parents' hatred of him, despite not knowing why. This social isolation caused Naruto to crave acknowledgement, which he would gain by pulling pranks.

On the day of his enrolment in the Ninja Academy[20] - Naruto first met Hinata Hyūga, who was being picked on by three bullies. Despite not knowing her, Naruto immediately came to her defence, but he was outnumbered and knocked unconscious, and the bullies damaged his red scarf. When Naruto awoke, Hinata thanked him for helping her and returned his scarf to him, but he let her keep it. He was unaware that the girl's growing affections for him began from that moment onwards.[21]

In the Academy, Naruto became a student of Iruka Umino, who acted as a surrogate older brother to keep him in line and help him work harder. Naruto also met his class-mate Sasuke Uchiha and tried to befriend him, since he was alone as well. Jealous of Sasuke's skills and popularity, however,[22] he developed a one-sided rivalry in his pursuit to prove himself just as good as, if not better than, Sasuke, wishing that someday, Sasuke would accept him as an equal.[23] Naruto also grew close with the owner of Ramen Ichiraku, Teuchi and his daughter Ayame, being welcomed as their favourite customer.

Personality

Naruto is noted as boisterous, exuberant and unorthodox, quite similar to Hashirama Senju.[24] He inherited his mother's verbal tic, as he ends his sentences with "Dattebayo!" when emotional. Though he responds best to competition and is not afraid to ask for assistance, Naruto is relatively naïve and slow to understand principles or situations. He often requires an oversimplified analogy in order to grasp explanations[25] and can even prove forgetful.[26] Naruto is aware of his faults, and admits he acts strong to mask his embarrassment and frustration about them.[27][28] Despite his naivety, Naruto can be quite observant, picking up on things others miss and retaining information casually gathered through conversation.[29]

Growing up as an orphan who suffered years of hatred and social isolation has influenced Naruto's character in a number of ways: he is heedless to formality and social standings, addressing certain people with nicknames instead of honourifics, although by the time of his adulthood, Naruto has slightly outgrown this trait.[30][31] He has picky eating habits of ramen, his favourite food; he has a perverted side that manifests as uses of the Sexy Technique or attempts to peep into women's baths.[32] Despite his quirks and the criticism they earn him, Naruto is said to have a personality that draws people to him,[33] inspiring friendship and loyalty through acts of genuine kindness that could change a person's world view and thus built meaningful relationships that he lacked in early life; the Sage of Six Paths believes Naruto's kindness is a special gift that allows him to save Kurama from its hatred.[34] Naruto deeply cherishes these bonds and will go to great lengths to protect them, best seen with Sasuke after his defection from Konoha. Naruto's time at the Falls of Truth revealed that a part of him hated the villagers for ostracising him, only to admire him after he saved them during Pain's Assault. Upon confronting it, he learned to be at peace with it, willingly becoming greater than what he suffered.[35]

Another of Naruto's prominent traits is his desire for acknowledgement; his pranks around the village were for people to notice him, even if it meant by scolding him. Therefore, he dreamed of one day becoming Konoha's Hokage, the epitome of acknowledgement and respect from everyone in the village.[36] Knowing his dream is a long, arduous and seemingly impossible path, Naruto developed his own nindo of never going back on his word. This life-long philosophy serves as the cornerstone of Naruto's great self-confidence; he believes he can accomplish any goal with enough hard work and perseverance, no matter what. This trait guides him in many aspects of life, such as his promise to bring Sasuke back to Konoha. Over time, his goal to be Hokage grew from a desire for the acknowledgement of others to a desire to help and protect the people close to him, which Tobi attributed to the Will of Fire. His nindo has since reinforced by his understanding that shinobi were meant to endure through hardships. His belief in hard work and perseverance made him detest shortcuts to achieving, as he disqualified his son from the Chūnin Exams for using the banned Kote, and expressed disgust at Momoshiki and Kinshiki Ōtsutsuki for their reliance on harvesting from Chakra Fruits to lazily gain power.

After the death of his master Jiraiya, talking to his father Minato and listening to Nagato's tragic story, Naruto grew to understand the destructive cycle of hatred and he vowed to break it in order to bring true peace to the world.[40] To that end, his participation in the Fourth Shinobi World War is not only to protect his friends but also to bear and erase the world's hatred all by himself. After encountering a reincarnated Itachi Uchiha, however, Naruto realises that he cannot handle everything alone and that he must allow his friends to support and fight alongside him. As he does so in war's climax, his fighting spirit inspires the Allied Shinobi Forces to join him and keep fighting to end the war as well, ultimately becoming an example for many people to admire, follow, and believe in.[41][42]
Naruto first met Hinata Hyūga when they were children, where his open kindness and courageous spirit earned him her admiration, which grew into love. On his part, Naruto remained mostly oblivious to Hinata's feelings for him and even considered her "weird" because of her shyness around him. However, that change during the Chūnin Exams in Part I when they began to interact more and support each other, causing Naruto to like her as a friend.[43] In Part II, as Hinata becomes willing to risk her life to protect Naruto, he, in turn, sees her as an actively strong person despite his speechlessness at her love confession. Naruto did grow to love Hinata subconsciously. Still, he was aware of it because he kept "fighting" for Sakura, which was just another way for him to compete with Sasuke. During The Last: Naruto the Movie, Naruto finally recognises the love that Hinata has always had for him, causing him to become more bashful and protective of her, just as she was for him. Realising that she alone has ever had faith in him and that she has always been there for him, he reciprocates her feelings and desires to be with her for the rest of his life. This new-found desire made him willing to make healthier lifestyle choices such as eating vegetables and reeling in his impulsiveness, something others have had little success with doing.

As an adult, Naruto becomes wiser and more mature, though he retains some of his negligence for honourifics.[44] Although he finally achieves his dream of becoming Hokage, its many tasks would often overwhelm Naruto to the point of him unable to spend time with his family. He admits that part of this stems was from not having grown up with a father himself, making him unsure of how to interact appropriately with his children.[45] Naruto also tends to be more responsible in his duties as Hokage and as a father. Nevertheless, Naruto profoundly loves his family, as he creates shadow clones to tend to them while he's busy, protects them in times of danger, spends time with them when he can, and expresses pride in his children's successes.[39] He adopts Hiruzen's philosophy that everyone in the village is his family, believing that genuine relationships are made up of love rather than blood relations.[46] His refusal to give his son any special treatment due to their blood-relationships, along with the insistence that the boy professionally addresses him as "Seventh" or "Hokage" while in the office, is a testament of Naruto's lack of bias and prejudice.[39] However, after facing Momoshiki Ōtsutsuki and realising how his overly-committed nature serving the entire village was significantly affecting his own family's happiness, Naruto came to accept that he needed to give them more attention. As such, by allowing more help from others, Naruto was able to enjoy more time with his family, restoring the same healthy relationship he had with them before he became Hokage.

Appearance

According to Jiraiya, Naruto strongly resembles his father: he has yellow-blond, spiky hair and blue eyes, while inheriting the shape of his mother's eyes and face. His trademark characteristics are the three whisker markings on his cheeks. During the Fourth Shinobi World War, Dan Kato initially mistook Naruto for Nawaki due to their stark resemblance. Naruto was rather short for his age during Part I, though he grew to be taller than Sakura in Part II. Naruto originally wore green goggles on his forehead, though he discards them upon becoming a genin.

In Part I, Naruto wore an orange and blue jacket with a white collar, a white swirl with a tassel on the left side, and a red Uzumaki crest on the back. He also wore orange pants with a shuriken holster on his right knee, blue sandals, and a blue forehead protector, given to him by Iruka after graduating from the Academy. In Part II, Naruto wears a more form fitting outfit after wearing out his original one while training with Jiraiya, with a T-shirt or mesh armour underneath. While retaining the swirls and orange pants, the blue pieces of his outfit changes to black: his forehead protector (which is now longer), sandals, and orange jacket, the black colour showing more prominence than the blue did originally. During his battle with Pain, Naruto briefly wore a short-sleeved red coat with a black flame pattern around the hem and carried a large scroll on his back.

Naruto loses his right arm after the Fourth Shinobi World War, though it is later replaced by a fully maneouverable prosthetic arm made of Hashirama Senju's cells, wrapped completely in bandages. In The Last: Naruto the Movie, Naruto grew again to be one of the tallest of his graduating class, cut his hair short, and wore a black elastic forehead protector. Over his pants and sandals, he wears a black uniform jacket with an orange zipper and buttons on the waist and sleeves, which can be folded up at times. He has a red armband with an Uzumaki crest on his left arm. After becoming Hokage, Naruto dons a garment similar to his father's: a white cape that has a red flame pattern around the hem, is held together by a red rope, and has the kanji for "Seventh Hokage" written vertically down the back. Underneath this, he wears an orange sweatshirt with black stripes (reverse in the manga version of Boruto: Naruto Next Generations), black pants and sandals. He occasionally wears the traditional Hokage headpiece, but has stopped wearing a forehead protector.

Abilities

Originally, Naruto was a rather inept ninja, failing to graduate from the Academy three times. Through sheer determination and training however, his skills rapidly improved to defeat strong genin like Neji Hyūga, Gaara, and Kabuto Yakushi, earning acknowledgement from all the Sannin for his potential.[53] Under various tutelage, Naruto was able to defeat various members of Akatsuki, ultimately earning praise from Konohagakure as a Hokage-material hero.[54] Naruto's personally defeated various reincarnated Kage[55] and jinchūriki during the Fourth Shinobi World War.[56] He also could compete against if not defeat world-threatening opponents, such as Madara Uchiha, Kaguya and Toneri Ōtsutsuki. Many believe Naruto was the central key to winning the war.[57][58][59] By adulthood, his prowess made him the Seventh Hokage, regarded as the strongest shinobi in history[60] and having command of overwhelming jutsu.[61] With the combined might of Sasuke Uchiha, noted as the only shinobi to rival him,[39] they are said able to destroy a continent.[62] Together, they overpowered transformed Momoshiki Ōtsutsuki, and pushed Isshiki Ōtsutsuki's vessel to its limit, with the latter admitting that his vessel was too weak to defeat Naruto without his assistance and Amado and even Isshiki himself believing they were the only ones capable of possibly defeating him in his imperfect reincarnation.

Chakra and Physical Prowess
As an Uzumaki and a reincarnation of Asura Ōtsutsuki,[63] Naruto has massive reserves of strong chakra, at least four times greater than Kakashi's, and described by Karin as "bright and warm."[64][65] His initial poor control of it was offset by his sheer reserves,[66] which where large enough to endure three and a half days of constant battle against several powerful opponents. Only by the end of his battle against Sasuke did he show exhaustion, and even then could still fight to a standstill and eventual victory.[67] Naruto's control improved greatly over time; able to transfer his chakra to others,[68] and perform one-handed hand seals.[69] Naruto's powerful life-force grants him an extreme longevity, healing power, stamina, and vitality;[70] this allowed him to survive the extraction of a tailed beast, though he required aid from Sakura to stay alive.[71] Naruto also learned how to counter genjutsu from Jiraiya, but is limited.[72] In adulthood, Naruto's chakra is powerful enough to intimidate Kawaki into submission[73] and destroy high-level barriers simply by releasing a burst of it.[74] He could repel Shikamaru's Shadow Imitation Technique, a feat that no one else could do.[62] His chakra, when he combined it with his son's Vanishing Rasengan, turned it into a gigantic Ultra-Big Ball Rasengan able to kill the empowered Momoshiki Ōtsutsuki who tried to use a copy of the technique to defeat his.[75] His chakra reserves were also so vast that he was able to overload Delta's chakra-absorbing eye with a continuous Rasengan-assault.[76]

While naturally a short-range fighter, Naruto originally was inept at taijutsu, requiring unpredictable attacks to surprise combat experts like Kiba Inuzuka and Neji.[77][78] He often utilised shadow clones in large if not massive numbers to simply overwhelm his foes.[79] Although these tactics resumed later, Naruto becomes much more adept at taijutsu due to Jiraiya's training.[80] After Fukasaku's tutelage, he could fend off a pair of expert kenjutsu users.[81][82][83] Two years after the war, Naruto's taijutsu prowess could best dozens of opponents without shadow clones or enhancements.[21] As Hokage, his taijutsu could pressure Momoshiki after he had absorbed Kinshiki.[75] Naruto could even hold off Delta despite her extreme body modifications, ultimately controlling the pace of the battle to tire her out and gradually overwhelm her[84] to win despite being in the defensive.[76] His speed had also increased to the point where he could effortlessly catch up with Kawaki after he tried to escape.[73]

Body Modifications
After losing his right arm during his final battle with Sasuke, Tsunade cultured an artificial prosthesis for him using the cells of Hashirama Senju. Though he has yet to display any special abilities from the artificial arm's unique cellular composition, like the Wood Release or self-sustaining without nourishment, he at least has the potential to awaken them. The arm has however further augmented his stamina and healing capacities. Also, similar to Madara and Obito's own usage of this prosthesis, he can easily remove and replace it. After Momoshiki's defeat, Naruto took inspiration from his chakra absorption technique and had Katasuke Tono and the Scientific Ninja Weapons Team modified the arm further with mechanical features. With it, Naruto is able to neutralise and even absorb an opponent's techniques, though they have yet to replicate Momoshiki's ability to discharge them as a counterattack.

Jinchūriki Transformations
Originally as the jinchūriki of Kurama's Yang half, Naruto had access to massive reserves of exceptionally powerful chakra, which was at least a hundredfold greater than Kakashi's.[64] These chakra levels were increased even further when the Yin half of Kurama was reunited with the Yang half inside of Naruto. Due to his inheriting his mother's unique chakra capacities and being Kurama's jinchūriki for essentially his entire life, Naruto's chakra has properly mixed with the fox's,[86] allowing him to perform several chakra-taxing techniques unhindered. Originally, he could only access Kurama's chakra in times of great anger. It enhanced Naruto's abilities, but the fox's negative influence made Naruto more aggressive. While essentially remaining himself when accessing a Version 1 state, manifest four tails would trigger Version 2 state, which made him lose control and would gradually turn into even more feral forms, requiring outside assistance to suppress Kurama's power and regain control, prompting him to avoid relying on the fox's power whenever possible. By end of the Fourth Great Shinobi War, he could access his Version 1 form without any loss in his mentality.[87]

Realising he could not avoid using Kurama's power, Naruto sought to control it with help from Killer B, a jinchūriki who had fully mastered the power of Gyūki, and unexpectedly, Kushina. Upon succeeding and taking most of Kurama's chakra, Naruto attained Nine-Tails Chakra Mode, which greatly increased his physical parameters. Naruto can also detect negative emotions in this mode. As he didn't have Kurama's cooperation, Naruto needed to exercise extreme caution while using the form, as the chakra exchange could cost him his life. Eventually, when Kurama acknowledged Naruto's life-long strength of character and Naruto learned the fox's true name, their new-found friendship granted Naruto access to its full power, which further increased his physical parameters and with no drawbacks. This cooperation of Kurama also provides Naruto with an immediate resistance from genjutsu. Two years later, he could isolate the form with one hand to enhance his strength or to block attacks.

Failing to transform into a replica of Kurama at first, Naruto instead achieved a Tailed Beast Mode in the unique form of a life-sized transparent avatar of chakra. In it, he could create Tailed Beast Balls and revitalise the life-forces of any he touches physically or with the avatar,[88][89] heal nearly any wounds,[39] or grant them temporarily chakra-cloaks.[90] After he became the jinchūriki of Kurama's complete self, Naruto is able to manifest the demon fox outside himself for a period akin to summoning, allowing both to fight as separate entities. During the endgame of the Fourth Great War, Naruto received chakra from the other tailed beasts during the Fourth Shinobi World War,[91] greatly increased his chakra reserves even further and allowed him to access their unique abilities himself, or infuse them into his own techniques. With the infusion of all nine of the tailed beasts' respective chakra inside of him, Naruto has become a medium to connect all the tailed beasts to communicate with each other[92] and made him a human pillar for the power of Ten Tails.[93]

Ninjutsu
In the Academy, the Sexy Technique was the only technique that Naruto could perform successfully, which had no practical use other than to shock people. Later, he learned more advanced and useful ninjutsu from Jiraiya. This included summoning toads from Mount Myoboku to assist him, and use them to crush enemies from above. He became skilled in shurikenjutsu, able to throw weapons quickly and with precision.[94] Naruto's repertoire expanded to fūinjutsu, where he could store his weapons within scrolls. His fūinjutsu was further increased upon receiving Gerotora near the start of the Fourth Shinobi World War.[95] In the anime, Jiraiya taught Naruto cooperation ninjutsu, combining his techniques with others to create an even more powerful one.[96] The collaboration techniques he performed with other individuals typically utilised his own elemental affinity, such as the Typhoon Water Vortex Technique with Yamato, the Wind Release: Toad Gun with Gamatatsu, and the Scorch Release: Halo Hurricane Jet Black Arrow Style Zero with Sasuke. He also learned from Asuma Sarutobi to flow into his weapons to increase their offensive might.[97]

Shadow Clone Technique
Naruto's first trademark technique was the Shadow Clone Technique. While originally failing constantly with a basic illusionary clone, after briefly studying the Scroll of Seals, he learned to create shadow clones on a mass scale. From then on, Naruto's skill with shadow clones blossomed to great heights. Having unusually high chakra reserves, Naruto could use this technique to create hundreds of shadow clones and retain large amounts of chakra in each one with relative ease.[98] He could use them to outnumber or deceive his enemies, manoeuvre himself in mid-air, transform into weapons, scout areas, or test an opponent's abilities.[99] During his elemental-affinity training, learning that the original will gain all the knowledge and conditioning of a shadow clone right after it dispersed. From this, Naruto can use his mass scale of clones to drastically speed up his training to gain years worth of experience in just days. By the time he became Hokage, Naruto's usage of this technique on mass-scale and prolonged-periods allowed him to constantly perform multiple simultaneous tasks throughout the village daily, although he does have a tendency to overexert himself, leaving him exhausted afterward.

Rasengan
Naruto's second trademark technique is the Rasengan. Originally, due to his poor chakra control, Naruto had to used a shadow clone to form the spherical shape while he provided the chakra. Over time, Naruto developed larger versions of the Rasengan and perform it faster.[100] During the Fourth Shinobi World War, he learned to use the Rasengan and its variants unaided with a single hand, or even form one in both hands simultaneously.[101] He also increased the size of his standard Rasengan.[102] Naruto had also shown the ability to release the Rasengan as an energy wave,[21] or as a projectile in the anime.[103] Using senjutsu or Kurama's chakra, Naruto can create more powerful and elaborate variations of the Rasengan; using the latter, he even developed the Super Mini-Tailed Beast Ball, performing it in a similar manner to the Rasengan. In the anime, usage of his tailed beast chakra also allows him to instantly perform massive Rasengan without the aid of his hands and launch in quick successions, similar to a Tailed Beast Ball.[104]

Nature Transformation
Naruto's natural affinity is Wind Release. Using shadow clones, one to form the Rasengan while another infuses the Wind chakra, Naruto could complete difficult task of producing a Rasengan that is the pinnacle of shape and nature transformation, something no one before him could accomplish, including Kakashi and his father. Once adjusting to using the Wind Release: Rasengan he could expand upon it to produce the Wind Release: Rasenshuriken. He also created different-sized variations, and could even use two Rasenshuriken simultaneously. Two years after its creation, he became skilled enough to form a Rasenshuriken without any shadow clones and throw it in his base form,[21] a feat which he previously could only do while using his enhanced modes.

After gaining the Six Paths Senjutsu, Naruto can utilise all basic five nature transformations, as well as Yin–Yang Release.[105] He could make perfect use of the latter to revitalise life-forces, heal whomever he touches, and restore missing organs.[106] After gaining chakra from the respective tailed beasts, Naruto can also use Shukaku's Magnet Release, Son Gokū's Lava Release, and Kokuo's Boil Release, able to infuse any of the other elements into is normal techniques as seamlessly as with Wind chakra.

Senjutsu
Naruto later trained in senjutsu at Mount Myoboku, which was only possible due to his high chakra reserves. Unlike Jiraiya, he was able to perfectly balance natural energy with his chakra, and enter a complete Sage Mode, symbolised by the orange pigmentation around his eyes and no other alterations to his appearance. Using Sage Mode made Naruto's techniques stronger, enhanced his physical parameters,[107][108][109] utilise the Frog Kata taijutsu style,[110] and sense chakra through advanced enough to identify different signatures from vast distances.[111] Since Fukasaku was unable to fuse with Naruto and gather natural energy for him due to Kurama's interference, Naruto had to employ shadow clones instead to maintain the technique, taking advantage of the clones' own buildup of natural energy being transferred to the original and let him use Sage Mode a number of times. However, creating more than five shadow clones overall would disrupt the focus of the clones gathering natural energy. The need for this method diminishes over time as Naruto became capable of entering Sage Mode much faster.[112] However, after finding unity with Kurama, Naruto overcame this problem and learned to combine Sage Mode with Kurama's chakra to further enhance his abilities, such that he could resist Nagato's control and shatter Truth-Seeking Balls.

Six Paths Senjutsu
Naruto also gained access to the Six Paths Senjutsu, which allowed him to fly and also manifest up to nine Truth-Seeking Balls, composed of all five basic natures, Yin–Yang Release, and imbue them with the Six Paths Sage Chakra. He could mould the balls into a myriad of shapes, fire them as projectiles and still control them from distance, or convert them into Tailed Beast Balls and use them create Tailed Beast Ball Rasenshuriken. While his shadow clones are unable to produce Truth-Seeking Balls of their own, Naruto is able to transfer control of his own to any of his shadow clones.

Six Paths Sage Mode
With the power given to him by Hagoromo, Naruto gained access to the Six Paths Sage Mode.[5] In this mode, his pupils take on a cross-like shape — without manifesting the orange pigmentation around his eyes present in Sage Mode. Going further, Naruto donned a new Nine-Tails Chakra Mode cloak, which he could access instantly and maintain much longer than his standard Sage Mode.[113] Naruto's physical attributes and techniques are further augmented,[114] to the point where he could dodge attacks that moved at the speed of light and deflect Truth-Seeking Balls. It also empowers his sensory abilities to the highest possible level,[115] which allowed him to sense the invisible shadows of Limbo.

Naruto also retained use of his Tailed Beast Mode avatar of Kurama, which rivalled Sasuke's Rinnegan-empowered Complete Body — Susanoo in size and might.[116] Using shadow clones, he could create and combine three Kurama avatars into a single construct with three faces and six arms, similar to Asura's.[117] This state allowed Naruto to infuse two massive Rasenshuriken with natural energy.[118]

Intelligence
While headstrong and often acting without thinking, Naruto's years as a prankster had given him a cunning imagination that was useful in split-second decision making, which has repeatedly proved invaluable in battle. He is a remarkable tactile learner, able to learn better through executing a task rather than understanding the theory of it.[119][25] Once seen in action, even the likes of the Second Hokage revise their thoughts about Naruto's intellect and instinct in battle.[120] After meeting Hagoromo, Naruto gained the innate ability to grasp the nature of chakra and comprehend all universal things,[121] allowing him to quickly master the new powers he received. By adulthood he had become a capable teacher, instructing students at Konoha's Ninja Academy.[122][123] During his fight with Delta, Naruto showed his ability to think ahead by hiding his power and faking defeat in order to make Delta drop her guard and reveal her plans, although Delta was perceptive enough to see through his attempts. Naruto ultimately was able to find out the weakness of Delta's Shinobi-Ware absorbing eye and overtax it after seeing it in action repeatedly.[76]

Naruto's most famous mental skill is to deceive his opponents, as he made effective use of even the most simple techniques to trick the deadliest of opponents.[124] He could formulate multi-step plans or backup plans in the thick of battle,[125] and act quickly even when given new information.[126] He can also seemingly make himself predictable by creating a pattern, only to throw off his opponent by breaking it. He has even thrown in what others would call completely useless techniques at powerful opponents to create an opening for a counterattack.[127] Naruto is rather observant, able to notice details others may overlook and subsequently take advantage of them to overcome his opponents.[128] As an adult, Naruto proved to be a capable teacher in ninjutsu, quickly teaching the basics to Kawaki.




















































Many, many, many, words later,
....and then Naruto died, the end.